In this video, we'll learn
more about the stl list and
forward list containers.
These are both sequence containers
and store their elements
in non-contiguous memory.
They don't provide direct access
to elements via the .at method or
subscript operator, but they're
very efficient when we need to
insert and delete elements in the
list once an element is found.
Let's first talk about the
list and then we'll talk
about the forward list after.
In order to use the list container, we
have to include the list header file.
The list acts as a doubly linked
list of elements, so we can go from
element to element in either direction.
Remember, lists do not
support direct element access.
The list has a front and a back,
and we can use all of the iterators,
but the iterators may become
invalid when deleting elements.
So let's see what a doubly linked
list looks like conceptually.
In this slide, we see a diagram
of what a simple list looks like.
Notice that the elements are
not contiguous in memory.
An element has a reference to the
element after it and before it
if they exist, that's why it's
referred to as a doubly linked list.
So there is some overhead involved
with maintaining these links.
We declare l as a list of integers
and initialize it to 1 2 and 3.
The list has a front and a back.
The front in this case is the element
1 and the back is the element 3.
With the list we can efficiently
add and remove elements from the
front and the back, and we can
also efficiently remove and insert
elements from anywhere in the list.
All we really have to do is remove or
insert the element and then re-link the
links to the other elements around it.
Inserting and removing elements other
than at the ends is very efficient,
but in order to do that, we need to
have an iterator to the element that
we want to remove or insert before.
This is usually done with the find
method, and it's done in linear time.
If you need a container where you will
have lots of insertions and removals
from the container and you don't
need direct access to the elements,
then the list is a good choice.
In the first example in this slide,
I declared l as a list of integers
and initialized it to 1 2 3 and 4.
In the second example, I declared
l1 as a list of integers and I'm
using an overloaded constructor
to create 10 integers and
initialize them all to 100.
In the third example, I'm declaring
stooges as a list of strings
and initializing them with std
strings and c-style strings.
Like vectors stud arrays and
decks, lists also support
assignment via initializer list.
So let's see some other common
methods provided by the list.
Let's start with the size method.
This method returns the number
of elements that are in the list.
And max size tells us what the maximum
number of elements a list can contain.
Remember, lists do not allow direct
access to elements so we can't use the
subscript operator or the .at method.
These are not available for lists.
The list also provides front and
back methods that return references
to the element at the front and the
element at the back of the list.
In this example, l.front refers
to 1 and l.back refers to the 5.
The list allows for efficiently
inserting elements at the
back and at the front.
This is done with the pushback
method and the push front method.
We can also have pop back and pop
front, which efficiently remove
elements from the back of the front.
In this slide, we have a list
of person objects called l.
We can create a person p1 named
Larry who is 18 years old, and
we can use the pushback method to
insert p1 at the back of the list.
We can also remove it using pop back.
Similarly, we can add a person object
to the front of the list with push
front and remove it with pop front.
The list container also supports in
place front and in place back which
are efficient ways to create and
initialize objects that we want to
store in the list right in place.
Inserting elements into a list
works a little differently from what
we've seen with other containers.
We can insert an element before an
existing element using the insert
method but the insert method expects
an iterator that's referencing the
element we want to insert before.
In this example, l is a list events
and I initialized l to 1 2 3 4 and 5.
Now I need an iterator to point
to an element in the list.
We can do this lots of ways but
let's use the find function.
We can call find with l.begin,
l.n, and we're looking for the 3.
In this case, the iterator it now is
referencing the element 3 in the list.
If we now call l.insert and pass
in it which is the iterator and the
number we want to insert in this
case 10, the 10 will be inserted
very efficiently before the 3.
The iterator will not be invalidated,
it still references the 3.
Now if we call l.erase and pass
in the iterator, the 3 will be
removed from the list and the
iterator will become invalid now.
Lists also allow resizing.
We can resize l to a size of 2
in which case all the elements
after the second will be removed.
If we resize to a value larger than
what we currently have, the list will
be expanded to that many elements
and the default initializer for the
type of object the list contains
will be called and those elements
stored in the newly created element.
So in this case, if we resize l to 5,
we'll add 3 new elements to the list,
and they'll all be initialized to zero
in this case because they're integers.
Finally, how do we traverse a list.
We can use a range based for
loop or we can use iterators.
Since lists are bi-directional,
we can iterate in both directions.
So in this case, we have a list
l00 initialized to the ints 1 2 3
4 and 5 and we have an iterator it
that will be referring to the 3.
When we de-reference i-t and
display the element, we get a 003.
display the elem0ent, we get a 3.
Then we can increment the
iterato00n the same way.
Finally, we can decrement the iterator
and we get right back to the 3.
Now let's see what some of
the differences are between
a list and a forward list.
The forward list was
added to the stl in c++11.
In order to use the forward
list, we must include the
forward list header file.
The forward list acts as a singly
linked list, so the list can only
be traversed in one direction.
The forward list incurs less overhead
than the list, but the downside is that
we can only use it in one direction.
But in many cases, this
is exactly what we want.
Similar to the list, the forward
list allows for rapid insertion and
deletion o1f elements once we have
an iterator to one of the elements.
Also the forward list does not
support direct element access.
As we'll see in a moment,
the forward list has no
concept of back, only front.
It doesn't make much sense to
get to the back of a list and
then not be able to traverse
backwards, so it's not available.
Obviously, reverse iterators make no
sense either so they're not supported.
So let's see what a forward
list might look like.
In this slide, we see a diagram of what
a simple forward list might look like.
We declare l as a forward
list of integers and
initialize it to 1 2 and 3.
The forward list has
only a front, no back.
The front in this
case is the element 1.
With a forward list, we can
officially add elements to
the front using push front.
You can see the pointers are
going in only one direction.
So let's see some of the common
methods used with forward lists.
Let's start with the size method.
It's not available.
There's an interesting discussion
about why the decision was made
to not provide a size method.
If you're interested, let me know
in the Q&A and we can talk about it.
The max size will tell us the
maximum number of elements
the forward list can store.
Also notice that we have a
front method but no back method.
In this case, the front method
returns a reference to the element 1.
Since the forward list only uses front
and not back, we have push front, pop
front and in place front available
for quick insertion of elements
at the front of the forward list.
So since the forward list is a
singly linked list, it makes sense
to insert elements into the forward
list after an iterator reference.
So the forward list supports methods
named explicitly like what they do.
In this example, l is a forward
list of the integers 1 2 3 4 5.
And we have an iterator
it that points to the 3.
We can now use l.insert after
and pass in the iterator and
the object we want to insert.
In this case, the 10 will
be inserted after the 3.
Notice that there are no insert
and place, erase methods.
They're all called insert after
and place after erase after.
The iterator doesn't invalidate in
this case, it still points to the 3.
So we can also use and place after
an erase after in the same way.
And the forward list allows resizing
in the same way that the list does.
Okay, so let's head over to the
IDE, and we'll see some examples
using a list and then we'll have
a challenge exercise using a list.
Okay, so I'm back in the IDE.
I'm in the section 20 workspace,
and I'm in the list project and
What I'd like to do here is
do the same thing we've been
doing the previous videos.
Go over some examples of
using the list container.
Now there's a couple
of differences here.
One is I'm including this iterator
header file here, and that's
for this advanced function.
I'll talk about that in a second.
It basically allows us
to advance an iterator.
We can't really do a plus
equals or minus equals on list
iterators, but we can advance
some using the advanced function.
So I'll show you that when I get to it.
We have the person class
that we've had before.
And in this case, the only difference
from the person class that you've seen
before is the default constructor.
Before we just use the default, we
let the compiler generate it for us.
Here I want the name to be
unknown and I want the h to be
0 when nothing is provided and
you'll see why in a little bit.
When we resize a list, it creates
objects by using a default.
I want you to see those that
word in that age so you can
actually see when that happens.
Other than that, it's exactly the same.
I've got the overloaded
constructor here.
I am overloading the less than
operator and equality operator.
Those are the 2 real important
operators for the stl.
And I've got a friend
insertion operator right
here for a stream insertion.
All right, I've got a template
function right here that allows me
to display any list of any type.
So the template parameter
is t that's being replaced.
Again, you've seen this
before with decks and vectors.
So it's just another
example here with a list.
So let's go through these examples.
I've got some tests here.
And I'll start with test one.
You can see the output over here.
As I said, I've already run this.
So the test is right there
that's where we're at right now.
Here we're creating a list of integers.
And you can see the syntax is
exactly as you would expect.
I hope that by now you're
seeing these patterns, right.
And it's not like oh my goodness.
In order to use the list, I've
got to learn all this new stuff.
The patterns are the same.
If you know how to use the deck
you know how to use a vector you
know how to use the list, it's
just a matter of going to the stl
documentation and see the nuances
and the specifics for each container.
But the general patterns are the same.
So in this case, I'm creating l1 as
one 2 3 4 5, and I'm displaying it.
You can see that being
displayed right here.
And now I'm creating l2
as a list of std strings.
And what I'm doing is I'm pushing
back to the back and front to
the front then I'm displaying.
And you can see exactly
what you'd expect.
Remember, a list has a
back and it's got a front.
So we're taking advantage of that.
It's very efficient
inserting on both ends.
Here I'm creating l3 as a list of
integers and I'm using the assignment
using the initializer list, just like
we've done with the other containers.
And then I'm displaying l3.
And you can see it right there.
And then we're using the same
constructor that we've used before.
And again, I know this is becoming
old hat but I I'm doing this
there's a method to my madness,
I'm doing this on purpose so
that you can see the consistency
between all these containers.
So that's the constructor.
We've got 10 100's.
And then we're displaying
l4, there are the 10 100s.
Okay, perfect, so let's
move on to the second test.
And that's right here.
You can see the output right over here.
In this case, I've got l as
a list of integers from 1
through 10, I'm initializing it.
I'm displaying it.
There's the display right there.
What's the list size.
Well, it's 10.
What's the front?
The front is the 1.
What's the back?
The back is the 10.
Remember, these are references
we're getting to them so we can
actually change them if we like.
There's the size is 10,
the front and the back.
We can clear the list.
That removes all the elements
from it and display it again.
Now it's empty, and its size is
0, as you can see right there.
Okay, again, very, very consistent.
So let's look at -- let's
take a look at test 3.
Now test 3 has a couple of things that
are going to be different for a list.
Here's l, and we're displaying
l which is 1 through 10.
You can see right here is test 3.
And right there is
the 1 through the 10.
And now what we're saying
is let's resize this to 5.
So what happens here.
Well, it's going to resize it to 5.
Basically, it's going to stop it
right here, and all this is gone.
So at this point, if I display l, you
can see 1 2 3 4 5 here in the output.
Now this is interesting.
If I resize it to 10,
what's going to happen?
Well, it says -- remember,
right now it's one 2 3 4 and 5.
So it's going to resize it
to 5 new elements, 1 2 3 4 5.
But what's it gonna put in there?
Well, what it's gonna do it's gonna
call the default initializer for each
one of those objects for integers
and for primitive types it's 0.
So you're going to get something like
that when I display it that's exactly
what we see 1 2 3 4 5 and 5 0s.
But when we have object types,
it's a whole different story.
In this case, look what I'm doing.
I've created persons is a
list of person objects, right.
Now it's empty.
But if I resize it to 5, now
I've got 5 person objects, which
ones does it create, it uses the
default constructor for them.
So if I display it, you can see
those strings that I talked about
earlier in the person class,
unknown age 0, unknown age 0.
It's exactly what's happening.
This is one of the things that
I talked about i think at the
beginning of this section.
It's very important when we use the stl
that we overload the less than, that
we overload the equality operator, that
we overload the default constructor.
This is why.
This is a really important reason why.
If we provide an overloaded constructor
and we don't provide the default
constructor, this will error out
because the default constructor
wouldn't be provided for us.
So we've got to make sure that we
we've got all our bases covered there.
Test 4.
Let's have a list here of integers
1 through 10 and display it.
You can see test 4 is right down here.
Actually, let me scroll
that up just a little bit so
it's a little easier to see.
There we go.
So here's test 4.
Those are my integers, 1 through
10, that's where I'm at right here.
Now I've got an iterator.
And obviously, I'm using auto.
But obviously if I had to declare
that the long way, it would
be std list int iterator it.
But in this case, the compiler
is deducing it based on the
return value of the find.
So what am I doing, I'm finding
that 5 in l from beginning to end.
So my iterator it is
going to be pointing to 5.
Now I know it's there, but
it's good practice to check.
So if it is not equal to the
end, that means I found it.
And what I want to do is I want to
call the insert method on the list
l, and I want to insert a 100, where.
I need the iterator.
That's the -- this is real important
with lists, both list and forward list.
So what what do I do.
I need that iterator.
The iterator is pointing to the 5.
In the case of a list, it's going to
insert the 100 before the iterator.
So it's going to stick
to 100 right in there.
And then when I display the list,
you can see right here that the
100 has been inserted between the
4 and the 5, right, to the left or
previous or before the iterator,
whatever you want to think about it.
In this case, I've got l2, which
is a list from 1000 2000 3000.
Now look what I'm doing,
I'm inserting into l.
Remember, l is this guy right here.
Now it's -- l is 1 2 3 4 then a
100 and then 5 6 7 8 9 and 10.
That's l right here.
So what I'm doing is I'm -- remember,
my iterator is still pointing
to the 5., it's not invalid
because I haven't deleted it.
So my iterator is still
pointing right here.
So what I want to do is I want
to say I want to insert into l
starting at that iterator, right,
here to the left of the iterator.
What do I want to insert?
I want to insert the entire
list l2 from beginning to end.
So what do you think
that's going to do?
Right in here, it's going to put
in 1000 2000 3000, and it's going
to do that super efficiently.
Then when I display the
list here again, you can see
what's happening 1 2 3 4.
There's your 1000, and then
1000 2000 3000 and then the 5.
Where's iterator pointing to now?
Still pointing to the
5, it's still valid.
Okay, let me clear this because
there's a lot of stuff here.
And this is the advanced function
that I was talking about.
This is in the iterator header file.
So what we can do here is
we can advance any iterator,
positive or negative assuming
it's a bi-directional iterator.
In this case, it is.
There's my iterator, and I
want to advance it minus 4.
So remember, iterator was
pointing to the 5, right.
So now the 5 is over here.
I want to move it 4
to the left 1 2 3 4.
It's going to be pointing to the 100.
That's what the advanced lets me do.
I can also do positive 4 obviously
or positive 2 or anything I want.
So in this case, it's going
to be pointing to the 100.
If I display what it's
pointing to, there's the 100.
And then i can say l.erase it,
what's that going to do, it's
going to erase the element that
the iterator is pointing to.
Then I'm displaying it again.
You can see the 100 is gone.
At this point, my
iterator becomes invalid.
I just deleted the element
it was pointing to.
So don't use that iterator again.
If you need it, reset it.
Okay, test 4 is good.
Now let's take a look at test 5.
In test 5, we'll do a couple of things.
The test 5 just has a
couple of pieces of input.
You'll see here it's actually
waiting for me to type something
in, so we'll do that in a second.
In test 5, I've got stooges which
is a list of person objects I'm
initializing it to Larry Moe and Curly.
And I'm displaying them.
Remember, the person class overloaded
the stream insertion operator, so
that's what's happening here, and
I'm displaying them that's what I've
got right here, Larry Moe and Curly.
Now I've got a couple of
variables here, name and age.
And what I want to do is I want to
ask the user to enter the name of the
next stooge and then enter their age.
And let's do that right now.
I'm going to type in -- right in
here, I'm just going to type in James.
And let's say that
james is 50 years old.
Now when I press enter, what's going
to happen is we're coming right
in here on line 130 right here.
And I'm in placing back.
Remember, here I'm not creating
an object here, I'm letting the
list create the object for me.
That's what the in place does.
So what's going to happen is James 50
is going to be passed into this method.
This method will create that
stooge object and insert
it at the back for me.
So when I press enter, I'll
display stooges, and I should
see James 50 at the back, right
in here, right after Curly.
So let's do that.
Let me come over here.
I'll press enter.
And you can see now that we've got
Larry Frank Moe Curly and James,
right at the back, super efficient.
And then the last thing we
want to do here is we want
to insert Frank before Moe.
Okay, so where's Moe,
I need to find it.
So I need an iterator that's
going to point to Moe.
I'm going to search stooges
from beginning to end, and
I'm looking for that object.
What's it going to use?
Operator, equality operator,
which I've overloaded.
So it's going to look from Moe 25.
Moe 25 is right here.
I know it's there.
So my iterator, if it's not
equal to stooge's n, I found it.
So what I'm going to do is
I'm going to insert at that
iterator before the iterator.
Everything on the list
happens before the iterator.
I'm going to insert Frank 18.
And then I'm going to
display stooges again.
And you can see right here Frank
18 is right before the Moe,
which is exactly like I expected.
All right, and then the
last test is test 6.
And this one's pretty cool.
All we're doing is sorting.
Real, real simple.
So in this case, I've got
stooges is a list of persons.
And I've got Larry Moe and Curly.
I'm displaying stooges.
And you can see it right
here Larry Moe and Curly.
Then I'm sorting it.
I'm saying stooges.sort and
then I'm displaying it again.
And look what happened?
Curly Larry Moe.
What operator is being used here?
Operator less than.
We overloaded that.
And what we're doing in
our operator less than.
Let me go back in case
you didn't remember.
Look at our operator less
than is comparing ages.
So here we've got 17 18 and 25.
That's how we decided that
we were going to sort, right.
We're not sorting by name.
We could have.
We could have written this as name, but
we decided -- well, let's sort by age.
So this is going to sort by that.
Okay, so that's it.
In the next video, we'll do a
challenge where we'll simulate a music
player using a doubly linked list.